docs/Non-Technical/Psychology/Books/Alchemy: The Dark Art and Curious Science of Creating Magin in Brands, Business, and Life.md, before:

# Alchmey by Rory Sutherland

Link: [Good Reads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26210508-alchemy)

## Overview

The main premise of the book is that while science and logic has resulted in immensely valuable products, there is a treasure trove still waiting to be discovered by applying apparently illogical solutions to human problems.

- Just because the scientific methodology has been so reliable it does not have to be the only tool to apply especially to a messy field like human behaviour.
- *"Engineering does not allow for magic. Psychology does."*
- Rory defines the way humans make decisions as "psycho-logic" - to distinguish it from the concepts of "logic" and "rationality"
- The idea is to become adept at spotting instances where the "universal laws" don't apply - when abandoning logic is sensible

There is matrix that can be plotted of human advances / ideas that fall ona spectrum between FAILS-to-WORKS and SEEMS WEIRD-to-MAKES SENSE.

e.g. Bicycles definitely work but are at the same time very weird - humans have leared how to ride bicycles but it is not built in a "logical" manner.

##

Commit message:

added ddia and alchemy notes

docs/Non-Technical/Psychology/Books/Alchemy: The Dark Art and Curious Science of Creating Magin in Brands, Business, and Life.md, after:

# Alchemy by Rory Sutherland

Link: [Good Reads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26210508-alchemy)

## Overview

The main premise of the book is that while science and logic has resulted in immensely valuable products, there is a treasure trove still waiting to be discovered by applying apparently illogical solutions to human problems.

- Just because the scientific methodology has been so reliable it does not have to be the only tool to apply especially to a messy field like human behaviour.
- *"Engineering does not allow for magic. Psychology does."*
- Rory defines the way humans make decisions as "psycho-logic" - to distinguish it from the concepts of "logic" and "rationality"
- The idea is to become adept at spotting instances where the "universal laws" don't apply - when abandoning logic is sensible

A 4x4 matrix that can be plotted of human advances / ideas that fall on a spectrum between FAILS to WORKS and SEEMS WEIRD to MAKES SENSE.

e.g. Bicycles definitely work but are at the same time very weird - humans have learned how to ride bicycles but it is not built in a "logical" manner.

## Signalling

## Subconcious Hacking

## Satisficing

## Psychophysics
