# Dynamic Programming

!!! note ""
    TODO: Add notes here - leaving blank for now.

## Basics

### Climbing Stairs
https://leetcode.com/problems/climbing-stairs/

### N-th Tribonacci Number
https://leetcode.com/problems/n-th-tribonacci-number/description/

### Perfect Squares
https://leetcode.com/problems/perfect-squares/description/

## Linear Sequences with Constant Transition
Here the solution requires us to solve the sub problem on every prefix of the array. The definition of a prefix of an array is a subarray from 0 to i for some i.

### Min Cost Climbing Stairs
https://leetcode.com/problems/min-cost-climbing-stairs/

### House Robber
https://leetcode.com/problems/house-robber/

### Decode Ways
https://leetcode.com/problems/decode-ways/

### Minumum Cost for Tickets
https://leetcode.com/problems/minimum-cost-for-tickets/description/

### Solving Questions with Brainpower
https://leetcode.com/problems/solving-questions-with-brainpower/

## Grid Problems
The cached table will have the same dimensions as the grid. The DP solution will involve solving the sub problem on a bunch of subgrids.

### Unique Paths
https://leetcode.com/problems/unique-paths/

### Unique Paths II
https://leetcode.com/problems/unique-paths-ii/

### Minimum Path Sum
https://leetcode.com/problems/minimum-path-sum/

### Count Square Submatrices with All Ones
https://leetcode.com/problems/count-square-submatrices-with-all-ones/

### Maximal Square
https://leetcode.com/problems/maximal-square/

### Dungeon Game
https://leetcode.com/problems/dungeon-game/description/

## Dual Sequence or DP on Subsequences
The prblem asks about calcuating some value related to two sequences. The `cache[i][j]` will store the answer to the subproblem solved on a prefix on sequence 1 with length i, and prefix on sequence 2 with length j.

### Longest Common Subsequence
https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-common-subsequence/description/

### Uncrossed Lines
https://leetcode.com/problems/uncrossed-lines/

### Minimum ASCII Delete Sum for Two Strings
https://leetcode.com/problems/minimum-ascii-delete-sum-for-two-strings/description/

### Edit Distance
https://leetcode.com/problems/edit-distance/description/

### Distinct Subsequences
https://leetcode.com/problems/distinct-subsequences/description/

### Shortest Common Supersequence
https://leetcode.com/problems/shortest-common-supersequence/description/

### Minimum Insertions / Deletions

## Interval
The DP sub problem is solved on every single interval (subarray) of the array.

### Longest Palindromic Subsequence
https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-palindromic-subsequence/description/

### Stone Game VII
https://leetcode.com/problems/stone-game-vii/

### Palindromic Substrings
https://leetcode.com/problems/palindromic-substrings/

### Minimum Cost Tree From Leaf Values
https://leetcode.com/problems/minimum-cost-tree-from-leaf-values/description/

### Burst Balloons
https://leetcode.com/problems/burst-balloons/description/

### Strange Printer
https://leetcode.com/problems/strange-printer/description/

### Palindromic Partitioning

## Linear Sequences with Non-Constant Transition
DP problem is solved on every prefix of the array just like group 2. However, transitions may not be simple and require a linear amount of options from indices j < i.

### Count Number of Teams
https://leetcode.com/problems/count-number-of-teams/

### Longest Increasing Subsequence
https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-increasing-subsequence/

### Partition Array for Maximum Sum
https://leetcode.com/problems/partition-array-for-maximum-sum/description/

### Largest Sum of Averages
https://leetcode.com/problems/largest-sum-of-averages/

### Filling Bookcase Shelves
https://leetcode.com/problems/filling-bookcase-shelves/

## Knapsack Problems
Problems with constraints.

### 0-1 Knapsack

### Minimum Cost to Cut a Stick
https://leetcode.com/problems/minimum-cost-to-cut-a-stick/description/

### Partition Equal Subset Sum
https://leetcode.com/problems/partition-equal-subset-sum/

### Number of Dice Rolls with Target Sum
https://leetcode.com/problems/number-of-dice-rolls-with-target-sum/description/

### Combination Sum IV
https://leetcode.com/problems/combination-sum-iv/description/

### Ones and Zeros
https://leetcode.com/problems/ones-and-zeroes/

### Coin Change
https://leetcode.com/problems/coin-change/

### Coin Change II
https://leetcode.com/problems/coin-change-ii/description/

### Target Sum
https://leetcode.com/problems/target-sum/description/

### Last Stone Weight II
https://leetcode.com/problems/last-stone-weight/

### Profitable Schemes
https://leetcode.com/problems/profitable-schemes/

## Matrix Chain Multiplication

## 1D Dynamic Programming

## 2D Dynamic Programming

## 3D Dynamic Programming
